Informal Report for Weeks of 3/16/09, 3/23/09, 3/30/09

Found that the "hanging" of Peace was not a problem with the program and 
was possibly an issue with the Redhawk cluster.  Did not encounter the 
issue again in the month of March.

Ran tests on 10000, 15000, 20000 EST data sets and found that as the 
number of ESTs increased, Peace's performance compared to WCD's was 
decreasing, and that the calculated threshold value for Peace was also 
decreasing (causing the quality of the clusters to drop as the 
clusters were more sparse than WCD's).

Discussed and researched the issue of setting the threshold value.  
Chose to use a threshold specific to D2 rather than basing the threshold 
on the mean and standard deviation of minimum spanning tree node 
weights, as we did not see a good reason to do so.  Tested comparisons 
between unrelated simulated ESTs in search of a "cutoff" point where the 
D2 score for a pair of ESTs becomes meaningless, since the distance 
between two ESTs taken from different genes should not have any meaning.  
Dr. Karro found a very clear cutoff point and we were able to set the 
threshold to a fixed value of 100 (note: this may be moved up to 130).  
This new threshold caused Peace to yield clustering quality results 
significantly better than those of WCD on the simulated EST data sets.

Ran Peace on a set of 36K real ESTs, which took slightly over 2 days 
runtime (on 30 nodes).  The results have not yet been analyzed.

Ran Peace on a set of 1000 real ESTs from a single gene per Dr. Liang's 
suggestion.  Peace placed these ESTs into two clusters.  These clusters 
have not been extensively analyzed.

Made plans to run WCD on a large set (300K?) of ESTs to provide 
clustering data for Dr. Liang.  Eventually we may want to use the same 
data for comparison with Peace (once Peace can handle the input size).  
Dr. Liang's website will give us a good way to analyze Peace's output 
for the real EST data that he has provided.

Development of a filtering heuristic for Peace continues.  The code is 
already written, but the heuristic needs to be empirically fine-tuned 
and analytically evaluated.



James Moler
